worker pool design patthern:
source from: https://rksurwase.medium.com/efficient-concurrency-in-go-a-deep-dive-into-the-worker-pool-pattern-for-batch-processing-73cac5a5bdca

In the realm of software development, efficiently managing the concurrent processing of tasks is a cornerstone of high-performance applications. Go (Golang), with its first-class support for concurrency, offers a powerful model for implementing such systems. A particularly effective design pattern for this purpose is the worker pool pattern, which can be adeptly applied using Go’s concurrency primitives — goroutines and channels. This article explores an advanced implementation of batch processing in Go that leverages the worker pool pattern, providing a blueprint for building scalable and robust data processing pipelines.

The Worker Pool Pattern in Go
The worker pool pattern is a concurrency design pattern that manages a limited number of workers to execute multiple tasks in parallel, efficiently using system resources and optimizing throughput. It involves creating a pool of worker goroutines that pick up tasks from a queue (usually a channel in Go) and process them concurrently. This pattern is particularly useful for rate-limiting and managing the execution of large numbers of tasks while avoiding resource exhaustion.

Key Components of the Worker Pool Pattern
Jobs Queue: A channel that holds the jobs to be processed. It acts as a queue from which worker goroutines fetch tasks.
Worker Goroutines: A fixed number of goroutines that continuously listen for new jobs on the jobs queue and process them.
Results Collector: An optional component, often another goroutine, responsible for collecting and processing the results produced by the workers.
Dispatcher: Coordinates the distribution of jobs to the worker pool and manages the lifecycle of the pool, including synchronization and shutdown.
Synchronization Mechanism: Tools like sync.WaitGroup are used to synchronize the completion of tasks, ensuring that the main program waits for all tasks to be processed before exiting.
Implementing a Batch Processing System with the Worker Pool Pattern
The implementation of a batch processing system in Go using the worker pool pattern encompasses defining tasks, distributing these tasks among worker goroutines for concurrent processing, and collecting the results in a synchronized manner. This method efficiently leverages Go’s goroutines and channels, maximizing processing throughput while minimizing overhead.

Practical Example
Consider a system designed to process a batch of computational tasks, such as calculating the square of a series of numbers. The following components constitute our implementation of the worker pool pattern for this task:

Jobs and Results Structures: Define the structures for representing jobs and their results.
Worker Function: Each worker goroutine processes tasks from the jobs channel and sends results to a results channel, using a sync.WaitGroup for synchronization.
Result Collector Function: Collects results from the worker goroutines, demonstrating the collection of completed tasks.
Dispatcher Function: Manages the distribution of jobs to the workers and oversees the collection of results, employing another sync.WaitGroup to ensure all results are collected before the program exits.
Main Function: Initializes the batch processing system, specifying the number of jobs and workers, and invokes the dispatcher to start processing.
Step 1: Defining Data Structures
The first step is to define the structures for the tasks (Job) and the results (Result).

type Job struct {
    ID    int
    Value int
}

type Result struct {
   JobID  int
   Square int
}
Step 2: Implementing Worker Goroutines
Each worker goroutine processes tasks received through a channel, computes the results, and sends them to a result channel. Workers signal completion using a sync.WaitGroup.

func worker(id int, jobs <-chan Job, results chan<- Result, wg *sync.WaitGroup) {
	defer wg.Done()
	for job := range jobs {
		results <- Result{JobID: job.ID, Square: job.Value * job.Value}
	}
}
Step 3: Collecting Results with Synchronisation
The result collector is a separate goroutine responsible for gathering and processing results from the worker goroutines, using a sync.WaitGroup to signal completion.

func collectResults(results <-chan Result, wg *sync.WaitGroup) {
	defer wg.Done()
	for result := range results {
		fmt.Printf("Job ID: %d, Input: %d, Squared Value: %d\n", result.JobID, result.JobID, result.Square)
	}
}
Step 4: Orchestrating the Batch Process
The dispatcher function orchestrates the entire batch processing operation, from initialising worker goroutines and distributing tasks to collecting results. It ensures synchronisation between all components using sync.WaitGroup.

func dispatcher(jobCount, workerCount int) {
 jobs := make(chan Job, jobCount)
 results := make(chan Result, jobCount)

 var wg sync.WaitGroup

 // Start workers
 wg.Add(workerCount)
 for w := 1; w <= workerCount; w++ {
  go worker(w, jobs, results, &wg)
 }

 // Start collecting results
 var resultsWg sync.WaitGroup
 resultsWg.Add(1)
 go collectResults(results, &resultsWg)

 // Distribute jobs and wait for completion
 for j := 1; j <= jobCount; j++ {
  jobs <- Job{ID: j, Value: j}
 }
 close(jobs)
 wg.Wait()
 close(results)

 // Ensure all results are collected
 resultsWg.Wait()
}
Step 5: Executing the Batch Processor
The main function sets the stage for the batch processing by specifying the number of jobs and workers, and then calling the dispatcher to start the process.

func main() {
 const jobCount = 100    // Total number of jobs to process
 const workerCount = 3  // Number of workers to process the jobs

 fmt.Println("Starting batch processing with synchronized result collection...")
 dispatcher(jobCount, workerCount)
}
Advantages of Using the Worker Pool Pattern
Resource Efficiency: By controlling the number of concurrent workers, the worker pool pattern prevents system overload, ensuring efficient use of resources.
Scalability: Adjusting the number of workers allows the system to scale based on workload and available resources.
Flexibility and Control: The pattern supports various task types and offers enhanced control over task processing, error handling, and monitoring.
Conclusion
Utilising the worker pool pattern in Go for batch processing enables the development of high-performance, scalable applications capable of handling large volumes of tasks with optimal resource utilisation. This article’s example serves as a foundation for building more complex, robust batch processing systems, showcasing the effectiveness of Go’s concurrency model in real-world applications. By adopting this pattern, developers can achieve greater efficiency and control in their concurrent processing tasks, making the most of what Go has to offer.
